# Internationalization

It is important to internationalize texts in UI instead of shipping hardcoded texts.

For this we have primarily `@spryker-oryx/utilities/i18n` package which introduces
lightweight i18n capabilities for vanilla JS and lit components.
It is free from dependencies on other oryx packages like `injector` so that
you can freely depend on from the most low level packages like `@spryker-oryx/ui`.

It is later extended to provide full i18n capabilities by the `@spryker-oryx/i18n` package
which introduces i18n capabilities like:

- Allows to load actual translation texts from projects
- Use pluralization, genders, etc. in translations with support of the ICU engine
- Provide regional translations with fallbacks

## I18n feature

To add full capabilities of i18n you need to load `I18nFeature` into your oryx app:

```ts
import { app, coreFeature } from '@spryker-oryx/core';
import { I18nFeature } from '@spryker-oryx/i18n';

app()
  .withFeature(coreFeature)
  .withFeature(new I18nFeature()) // <-- Required part
  .create();
```

### Loading translation texts

To be able to load translation texts into the app you need to define a loader function
when you add `I18nFeature` to your app:

```ts
import { app, coreFeature } from '@spryker-oryx/core';
import { I18nFeature } from '@spryker-oryx/i18n';

app()
  .withFeature(coreFeature)
  .withFeature(
    new I18nFeature({
      // Here as example we are loading translations from TS modules
      load: (localeId) => import(`../i18n/${localeId}.ts`), // <-- Required part
    })
  )
  .create();
```

This gives you full flexibility to how and where to load your translation texts from.
It just needs to return a promise of a `{ default: I18nData }` type
where [`I18nData`](libs/i18n/src/lib/i18n.loader.ts) is simply an object
with tokens as keys and values are actual translation texts.

Example of a translation data in the form of a TS module:

```ts
export default {
  'domain.hello': 'Hola!',
};
```

## Tokens

Tokens are used to define translation texts.

Tokens should be written with following rules:

- Use `kebab-case` format
- Use "domain" prefix before main text separated by dot (ex. `domain.my-text`)
- For context variables use curly braces syntax `{}` and `camelCase` (ex. `domain.my-text-{varName}`)

### Token lookups

When a token is being translated it will be used as a key to find needed translation text
in currently used language data bundle:

1. Check if the token exists in current data bundle
2. If it exists - return translation text
3. Otherwise try to check in fallback language data bundle
4. If found - return fallback translation text
5. Otherwise start splitting token by dot and perform lookups by traversing the token parts from most specific to less specific (ex. first `domain.my-text` then `my-text`)
6. If found - return less specific translation text
7. Otherwise perform a fallback transformation

### Token fallback transformation

If a token translation is not found in any of the language data bundles
or if the i18n feature is not loaded (which is a default behavior),
then token will be auto-converted to a readable message as following:

1. Cut away everything before the right-most dot (ex. `cart.items-count-{count}` -> `items-count-{count}`)
2. Interpolate all context variables within token (ex. `items-count-{count}` -> `items-count-5`)
3. Replace all dashes (`-`) with spaces (` `) (ex. `items-count-5` -> `items count 5`)
4. Capitalize first letter (ex. `items count 5` -> `Items count 5`)
5. Trim final string and return it (ex. `Items count 5`)

## Translation engine

When a full i18n feature is used from `@spryker-oryx/i18n` package your translation texts
can use full power of standartized ICU message expressions:

- [Message formatting](https://unicode-org.github.io/icu/userguide/format_parse/messages/) (with support of pluralization and selects)

Optionally, other ICU capabilities may be loaded:

- [Number formatting](https://unicode-org.github.io/icu/userguide/format_parse/numbers/)
- [Date and time formatting](https://unicode-org.github.io/icu/userguide/format_parse/datetime/)

### Message formatting

ICU message formatting defines standard syntax to handle common translation cases:

- Pluralization (ex. `You have {count} {count, plural, one {item}, other {items}} in cart`)
- Selects (ex. `{gender, select, male {He}, female {She}, other {They}} invited you to party!`)

## In lit components

To internationalize texts inside lit components you should use
[`i18n`](/libs/utilities/i18n/src/i18n.directive.ts) lit-directive
from `@spryker-oryx/utilities/i18n` package:

```ts
import { LitElement, html } from 'lit';
import { i18n } from '@spryker-oryx/utilities/i18n';

class ExampleComponent extends LitElement {
  protected override render() {
    return html`<div>${i18n('domain.hello')}</div>`;
  }
}
```

## In vanilla JS

To internationalize texts inside vanilla JS/TS you should use
[`I18nService`](/libs/i18n/src/lib/i18n.service.ts) service
from `@spryker-oryx/i18n` package:

```ts
import { inject } from '@spryker-oryx/injector';
import { I18nService } from '@spryker-oryx/i18n';

class Example {
  constructor(i18nService = inject(I18nService)) {
    i18nService
      .translate('domain.hello')
      .subscribe((text) => console.log(text));
  }
}
```
