# Internationalization

It is important to internationalize texts in UI instead of shipping hardcoded texts.

To achieve this, we provide the `@spryker-oryx/utilities/i18n` package which introduces
lightweight i18n capabilities for vanilla JS and Lit components. It is free from dependencies on other oryx packages like `injector`, so you can freely depend on it from the most low-level packages like `@spryker-oryx/ui`.

For full i18n capabilities, integrate the `@spryker-oryx/i18n` package. The package includes the capabilities like the following:

- Enables the loading of actual translation texts from projects
- Enables the usage pluralization, genders, etc. in translations with the support of the ICU engine
- Provides regional translations with fallbacks

## Install i18n

To add full capabilities of i18n, load `I18nFeature` into the oryx app:

```ts
import { app, coreFeature } from '@spryker-oryx/core';
import { I18nFeature } from '@spryker-oryx/i18n';

app()
  .withFeature(coreFeature)
  .withFeature(new I18nFeature()) // <-- Required part
  .create();
```

### Enable the loading of translation texts

To be able to load translation texts into the app, when installing `I18nFeature`, define a loader function:

```ts
import { app, coreFeature } from '@spryker-oryx/core';
import { I18nFeature } from '@spryker-oryx/i18n';

app()
  .withFeature(coreFeature)
  .withFeature(
    new I18nFeature({
      // Here as example we are loading translations from TS modules
      load: (localeId) => import(`../i18n/${localeId}.ts`), // <-- Required part
    })
  )
  .create();
```

This gives you full flexibility to how and where to load your translation texts from.
The function returns a promise of a `{ default: I18nData }` type. [`I18nData`](libs/i18n/src/lib/i18n.loader.ts) is an object with tokens as keys, and the values are actual translation texts.

Example of a translation data in the form of a TS module:

```ts
export default {
  'domain.hello': 'Hola!',
};
```

## Tokens

Tokens are used to define translation texts. To write tokens, follow the rules:

- Use kebab-case format.
- Prefix the main text with `domain.`. Example: `domain.my-text`.
- For context variables, use camelCase with the tag syntax `<>`. Example: `domain.my-text-<varName>`.

### Token lookups

When a token is being translated, it is used as a key to find a needed translation text in currently used language data bundle:

1. Check if the token exists in current data bundle.
2. If it exists, return translation text.
3. Otherwise, check in fallback language data bundle.
4. If it exists, in the fallback bundle, return fallback translation text.
5. Otherwise, start splitting the token by dot and perform lookups by traversing the token parts from the most specific to the less specific. For example, the first lookup is `domain.my-text`, and the second one is `my-text`.
6. If found in current data bundle, return less specific translation text.
7. Otherwise, perform a fallback transformation.

### Token fallback transformation

If a token translation is not found in any of the language data bundles, or if the i18n feature is not loaded (which is a default behavior), the token is auto-converted to a readable message as follows:

1. Cut away everything before the right-most dot. For example, `cart.items-count-<count>` -> `items-count-<count>`.
2. Replace all dashes (`-`) with spaces (` `). For example, `items-count-5` -> `items count 5`.
3. Capitalize the first letter. For example, `items count 5` -> `Items count 5`.
4. Interpolate all the context variables within the token. For example, `items-count-<count>` -> `items-count-5`.
5. Trim the final string and return it. For example, `Items count 5`.

## Translation engine

When a full i18n feature is used from `@spryker-oryx/i18n` package, translation texts can use the full power of standartized ICU message expressions:

- [Message formatting](https://unicode-org.github.io/icu/userguide/format_parse/messages/)

Optionally, other ICU capabilities may be loaded:

- [Number formatting](https://unicode-org.github.io/icu/userguide/format_parse/numbers/)
- [Date and time formatting](https://unicode-org.github.io/icu/userguide/format_parse/datetime/)

### Message formatting

ICU message formatting defines standard syntax to handle common translation cases:

- Pluralization: for example, `You have {count} {count, plural, one {item} other {items}} in cart`.
- Selects: for example, `{gender, select, male {He} female {She} other {They}} invited you to party!`.

## Internationalize texts in lit components

To internationalize texts inside lit components, use the [`i18n`](/libs/utilities/i18n/src/i18n.directive.ts) lit-directive from the `@spryker-oryx/utilities/i18n` package:

```ts
import { LitElement, html } from 'lit';
import { i18n } from '@spryker-oryx/utilities/i18n';

class ExampleComponent extends LitElement {
  protected override render() {
    return html`<div>${i18n('domain.hello')}</div>`;
  }
}
```

## Internationalize texts in vanilla JS components

To internationalize texts in vanilla JS or TS, use the [`I18nService`](/libs/i18n/src/lib/i18n.service.ts) service from the `@spryker-oryx/i18n` package:

```ts
import { inject } from '@spryker-oryx/injector';
import { I18nService } from '@spryker-oryx/i18n';

class Example {
  constructor(i18nService = inject(I18nService)) {
    i18nService
      .translate('domain.hello')
      .subscribe((text) => console.log(text));
  }
}
```
